FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 48, Art. 4]

Whether Anger Above All Causes Taciturnity?
Objection 1: It would seem that anger does not cause taciturnity.
Because taciturnity is opposed to speech. But increase in anger
conduces to speech; as is evident from the degrees of anger laid down
by Our Lord (Matt. 5:22): where He says: "Whosoever is angry with his
brother"; and " . . . whosoever shall say to his brother, 'Raca'";
and " . . . whosoever shall say to his brother, 'Thou fool.'"
Therefore anger does not cause taciturnity.
Obj. 2: Further, through failing to obey reason, man sometimes breaks
out into unbecoming words: hence it is written (Prov. 25:28): "As a
city that lieth open and is not compassed with walls, so is a man
that cannot refrain his own spirit in speaking." But anger, above
all, hinders the judgment of reason, as stated above (A. 3).
Consequently above all it makes one break out into unbecoming words.
Therefore it does not cause taciturnity.
Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Matt. 12:34): "Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaketh." But anger, above all, causes a
disturbance in the heart, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore above all
it conduces to speech. Therefore it does not cause taciturnity.
_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Moral. v, 30) that "when anger does
not vent itself outwardly by the lips, inwardly it burns the more
fiercely."
_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3; Q. 46, A. 4), anger both
follows an act of reason, and hinders the reason: and in both
respects it may cause taciturnity. On the part of the reason, when
the judgment of reason prevails so far, that although it does not
curb the appetite in its inordinate desire for vengeance, yet it
curbs the tongue from unbridled speech. Wherefore Gregory says
(Moral. v, 30): "Sometimes when the mind is disturbed, anger, as if
in judgment, commands silence." On the part of the impediment to
reason because, as stated above (A. 2), the disturbance of anger
reaches to the outward members, and chiefly to those members which
reflect more distinctly the emotions of the heart, such as the eyes,
face and tongue; wherefore, as observed above (A. 2), "the tongue
stammers, the countenance takes fire, the eyes grow fierce."
Consequently anger may cause such a disturbance, that the tongue is
altogether deprived of speech; and taciturnity is the result.
Reply Obj. 1: Anger sometimes goes so far as to hinder the reason
from curbing the tongue: but sometimes it goes yet farther, so as to
paralyze the tongue and other outward members.
And this suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.
Reply Obj. 3: The disturbance of the heart may sometimes superabound
to the extend that the movements of the outward members are hindered
by the inordinate movement of the heart. Thence ensue taciturnity and
immobility of the outward members; and sometimes even death. If,
however, the disturbance be not so great, then "out of the abundance
of the heart" thus disturbed, the mouth proceeds to speak.
OF HABITS IN GENERAL, AS TO THEIR SUBSTANCE
(In Four Articles)
After treating of human acts and passions, we now pass on to the
consideration of the principles of human acts, and firstly of
intrinsic principles, secondly of extrinsic principles. The intrinsic
principle is power and habit; but as we have treated of powers in the
First Part (Q. 77, seqq.), it remains for us to consider them in general:
in the second place we shall consider virtues and vices and other like
habits, which are the principles of human acts.
Concerning habits in general there are four points to consider: First,
the substance of habits; second, their subject; third, the cause of
their generation, increase, and corruption; fourth, how they are
distinguished from one another.
Under the first head, there are four points of inquiry:
(1) Whether habit is a quality?
(2) Whether it is a distinct species of quality?
(3) Whether habit implies an order to an act?
(4) Of the necessity of habit.
