THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 63, Art. 3]

Whether Any Moral Virtues Are in Us by Infusion?
Objection 1: It would seem that no virtues besides the theological
virtues are infused in us by God. Because God does not do by Himself,
save perhaps sometimes miraculously, those things that can be done by
second causes; for, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv), "it is God's
rule to bring about extremes through the mean." Now intellectual and
moral virtues can be caused in us by our acts, as stated above (A.
2). Therefore it is not reasonable that they should be caused in us
by infusion.
Obj. 2: Further, much less superfluity is found in God's works than
in the works of nature. Now the theological virtues suffice to direct
us to supernatural good. Therefore there are no other supernatural
virtues needing to be caused in us by God.
Obj. 3: Further, nature does not employ two means where one suffices:
much less does God. But God sowed the seeds of virtue in our souls,
according to a gloss on Heb. 1 [*Cf. Jerome on Gal. 1: 15, 16].
Therefore it is unfitting for Him to cause in us other virtues by
means of infusion.
_On the contrary,_ It is written (Wis. 8:7): "She teacheth temperance
and prudence and justice and fortitude."
_I answer that,_ Effects must needs be proportionate to their causes
and principles. Now all virtues, intellectual and moral, that are
acquired by our actions, arise from certain natural principles
pre-existing in us, as above stated (A. 1; Q. 51, A. 1): instead of
which natural principles, God bestows on us the theological virtues,
whereby we are directed to a supernatural end, as stated (Q. 62, A.
1). Wherefore we need to receive from God other habits corresponding,
in due proportion, to the theological virtues, which habits are to
the theological virtues, what the moral and intellectual virtues are
to the natural principles of virtue.
Reply Obj. 1: Some moral and intellectual virtues can indeed be
caused in us by our actions: but such are not proportionate to the
theological virtues. Therefore it was necessary for us to receive,
from God immediately, others that are proportionate to these virtues.
Reply Obj. 2: The theological virtues direct us sufficiently to our
supernatural end, inchoatively: i.e. to God Himself immediately. But
the soul needs further to be perfected by infused virtues in regard
to other things, yet in relation to God.
Reply Obj. 3: The power of those naturally instilled principles does
not extend beyond the capacity of nature. Consequently man needs in
addition to be perfected by other principles in relation to his
supernatural end.
