SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 98, Art. 2]

Whether the Old Law Was from God?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law was not from God. For it
is written (Deut. 32:4): "The works of God are perfect." But the Law
was imperfect, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore the Old Law was not
from God.
Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Eccles. 3:14): "I have learned that
all the works which God hath made continue for ever." But the Old Law
does not continue for ever: since the Apostle says (Heb. 7:18):
"There is indeed a setting aside of the former commandment, because
of the weakness and unprofitableness thereof." Therefore the Old Law
was not from God.
Obj. 3: Further, a wise lawgiver should remove, not only evil, but
also the occasions of evil. But the Old Law was an occasion of sin,
as stated above (A. 1, ad 2). Therefore the giving of such a law does
not pertain to God, to Whom "none is like among the lawgivers" (Job
36:22).
Obj. 4: Further, it is written (1 Tim. 2:4) that God "will have all
men to be saved." But the Old Law did not suffice to save man, as
stated above (A. 1). Therefore the giving of such a law did not
appertain to God. Therefore the Old Law was not from God.
_On the contrary,_ Our Lord said (Matt. 15:6) while speaking to the
Jews, to whom the Law was given: "You have made void the commandment
of God for your tradition." And shortly before (verse 4) He had said:
"Honor thy father and mother," which is contained expressly in the
Old Law (Ex. 20:12; Deut. 5:16). Therefore the Old Law was from God.
_I answer that,_ The Old Law was given by the good God, Who is the
Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ. For the Old Law ordained men to
Christ in two ways. First by bearing witness to Christ; wherefore He
Himself says (Luke 24:44): "All things must needs be fulfilled, which
are written in the law . . . and in the prophets, and in the psalms,
concerning Me": and (John 5:46): "If you did believe Moses, you would
perhaps believe Me also; for he wrote of Me." Secondly, as a kind of
disposition, since by withdrawing men from idolatrous worship, it
enclosed (_concludebat_) them in the worship of one God, by Whom the
human race was to be saved through Christ. Wherefore the Apostle says
(Gal. 3:23): "Before the faith came, we were kept under the law shut
up (_conclusi_), unto that faith which was to be revealed." Now it is
evident that the same thing it is, which gives a disposition to the
end, and which brings to the end; and when I say "the same," I mean
that it does so either by itself or through its subjects. For the
devil would not make a law whereby men would be led to Christ, Who
was to cast him out, according to Matt. 12:26: "If Satan cast out
Satan, his kingdom is divided" [Vulg.: 'he is divided against
himself']. Therefore the Old Law was given by the same God, from Whom
came salvation to man, through the grace of Christ.
Reply Obj. 1: Nothing prevents a thing being not perfect simply, and
yet perfect in respect of time: thus a boy is said to be perfect, not
simply, but with regard to the condition of time. So, too, precepts
that are given to children are perfect in comparison with the
condition of those to whom they are given, although they are not
perfect simply. Hence the Apostle says (Gal. 3:24): "The law was our
pedagogue in Christ."
Reply Obj. 2: Those works of God endure for ever which God so made
that they would endure for ever; and these are His perfect works. But
the Old Law was set aside when there came the perfection of grace;
not as though it were evil, but as being weak and useless for this
time; because, as the Apostle goes on to say, "the law brought
nothing to perfection": hence he says (Gal. 3:25): "After the faith
is come, we are no longer under a pedagogue."
Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 79, A. 4), God sometimes permits
certain ones to fall into sin, that they may thereby be humbled. So
also did He wish to give such a law as men by their own forces could
not fulfill, so that, while presuming on their own powers, they might
find themselves to be sinners, and being humbled might have recourse
to the help of grace.
Reply Obj. 4: Although the Old Law did not suffice to save man, yet
another help from God besides the Law was available for man, viz.
faith in the Mediator, by which the fathers of old were justified
even as we were. Accordingly God did not fail man by giving him
insufficient aids to salvation.
